Fashion and beauty are often touted to be synonymous with women but men are equally interested in these. Lately, it is found that men also follow the style and like to live a fashionable life. Beauty for them is personal grooming that enhances their overall persona. The Fashion & Beauty section holds articles on emerging fashion and beauty trends that people like to follow these days.What is fashion?Fashion is a term that is given to enhancing the personal style of clothing. People these days no longer want to dress up casually but they want to add an element of fashion in their style that distinguishes them from others. Fashion is inspired by celebrities and designers that keep on experimenting. One style becomes popular at a time and it is called fashion of that time frame. Some fashion elements are timeless that aren’t bounded by time but remain fashionable forever. Apart from clothing, footwear, accessories and compatible hairstyle are also a part of fashion.Types of FashionLimited edition fashionYou must have heard about limited-edition things such as clothes, watches, perfumes, shoes, etc. This type of fashion is for people who are interested in something good and exclusive. These aren’t pricey always but mostly come in the affordable range. Only a small number of products like 100 or 1000 limited edition pieces are made and sold worldwide.Designer wear fashionThere is n number of designers that design clothes matching their vibe and vision. Some hold expertise in a particular fashion such as wedding fashion, ramp fashion, etc. Their collection has items from affordable to the expensive range that people can select by walking into their stores.Classic or timeless fashionClothes or fashion accessories that can never go out of fashion are classic ones. They are always in trend and you can wear them even after a decade. Basic tees, denim, silk sarees, etc. are some examples of timeless fashion that doesn’t look dated.Street fashionThis fashion is the cheapest fashion as you’ll get these designs on almost every street. These are made for people who like to wear what every second person is wearing. The latest style pieces at a much cheaper rate are what street fashion is all about. The younger generation like college-goers mostly follows street fashion to look updated for a less budget.Diffusion fashionDiffusion fashion is quite popular as these are ready-to-wear clothing that puts their expensive clothing on sale. Ordinary people can wear designer clothes for a much cheaper cost is what this type of fashion promises.Eco-fashionThis is a new fashion type that integrates stylish clothing with ecological elements. These are affordable clothes that contribute to saving the environment. The raw material is eco-friendly and the fashion is created responsibly.What is Beauty?Beauty is the state of looking and feeling beautiful. It is defined as a quality that gives pleasure to the senses and looks appealing to the eyes. Beauty is not just facial beauty but how a person presents itself that looks enchanting to others.Guide to Beauty ProductsHere are some of the common beauty products that women carry the most:

Skincare essentials- Beauty cannot be maintained without using the right skincare products. Cleansing milk, toner, moisturizer, anti-aging creams, makeup remover are some common skincare essentials.
Face Makeup- Beauty is nowadays aesthetics. People use makeup products to enhance beauty. Foundation, concealer, highlighter, contour, blush, etc. are face makeup essentials.
Eye Makeup- To enhance the look of eyes, kajal, eyeliner, eye shadow, etc. are used.
Lip Makeup- Talking about lip beauty, lip balms, lipsticks and lip liners are used to make lips beautiful.Red Wine For Skin And Hair? Here Is Why You Should Try Red Wine For Good HealthScrubs to Soaks: Here Are 8 Ways To Remove Dead Skin Cells From Your FeetKaran Johar Takes Jibe At Celebs Getting Fillers And Botox; Know The Side Effects Of Such FillersAre Your Nails Healthy? Here’s What You Can Do To Maintain Your NailsBeauty Benefits Of Turmeric Oil: Here's How This Oil Can Promote Skin And Hair HealthSara Ali Khan Opens Up About Beauty And Wellness; Here’s How She Takes A Holistic Approach Towards ThemBotox vs Fillers: Know The Difference Between Two Beauty TreatmentsEnhancing Facial Proportions With Dermal Fillers: Know Its Benefits And SafetyBeauty Benefits Of Pumpkin: Here's How You Can Use Pumpkin To Enhance Your BeautyCleaning Makeup Kit: Here's How You Can Clean Your Makeup Tools And Maintain Skin Health