Haemophilia is a genetic disorder that affects the clotting of blood. It is a rare bleeding disorder in which the blood does not clot properly. It results in the risk of increased bleeding or bruising. Being a genetic disorder, it can be transferred from parents to children. But how to understand if your child is at the risk of getting it?To understand more about haemophilia disorder and its determination in kids, OnlyMyHealth interacted with Dr Kishore Kumar, Paediatrician and Neonatologist, Cloudnine Group of Hospitals, Bengaluru.Before moving on it its diagnosis in kids, let’s first understand what it is.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention states that haemophilia is caused by a mutation or change in one of the genes that provides instructions for making of the clotting factor proteins which are essential to form a blood clot. This mutation can prevent the clotting protein from working properly or to be missing completely.Explaining haemophilia in easier words and its transfer to children, Dr Kumar said, “Haemophilia is a genetic disorder that affects blood clotting. It primarily affects males, as it is typically passed down through the X chromosome. This means that if a mother carries the gene for haemophilia on one of her X chromosomes, there's a possibility she could pass it on to her son.”Also read: Haemophilia B Cured By Transformational Therapy In Major Breakthrough Risk Factors For Haemophilia The two most common types of haemophilia are haemophilia A and haemophilia B. “Haemophilia A is caused by a deficiency of clotting factor VIII, while haemophilia B is caused by a deficiency of clotting factor IX. Both of these clotting factors are essential for blood to clot properly, and their absence or deficiency can lead to prolonged bleeding, both internally and externally,” Dr Kumar said.  Below are some key factors pointed by Dr Kumar, that might suggest that your child could be at a risk for haemophilia.   Family History One of the most primary and significant risk factors for haemophilia is having a family history of it. “If there's a known history of haemophilia in your family, especially on the mother’s side (since mothers carry the X chromosome), there's a possibility that you could be a carrier or that your child could inherit the disorder,” Dr Kumar said.   Prolonged Bleeding According to Dr Kumar, if your child experiences frequent or prolonged bleeding episodes after minor injuries, surgeries, or dental procedures, this could be a sign of haemophilia.  Bruising Easily Haemophiliac individuals tend to bruise easily and often. If your child frequently develops unexplained bruises, this could be a red flag for a bleeding disorder. Also read: World Haemophilia Day: Experiencing Swelling Or Pain In Joints? It May Be Due To This Blood Disease  Unexplained Nosebleeds or Gum Bleeding Recurrent bleeding from nose or from the gums without a clear cause could also indicate a problem with blood clotting  Postpartum Haemorrhage “If the mother experienced significant bleeding after childbirth, it could be an indicator of a bleeding disorder that could be passed on to her child,” Dr Kumar said.   Joint Pain or Swelling Internal bleeding into joints or muscles is a common symptom of haemophilia. If your child experiences joint pain, swelling, or tightness, especially after minor injuries, it could be a sign of internal bleeding.  In order to determine if your child has haemophilia, it is important to go through some tests. If you observe the above symptoms in your child, or if you have a family history of haemophilia or suspect that your child might be at risk you can consult your healthcare professional. Your doctor can perform specific blood tests to check for clotting factors. These tests can help diagnose haemophilia or other bleeding disorders.  Conclusion Concluding, Dr Kumar said, “If you suspect that your child might be at risk for haemophilia based on these factors, it's essential to consult with a healthcare professional promptly. Early diagnosis and proper management can significantly improve outcomes and quality of life for the child.”The two most common types of haemophilia are haemophilia A and haemophilia B. “Haemophilia A is caused by a deficiency of clotting factor VIII, while haemophilia B is caused by a deficiency of clotting factor IX. Both of these clotting factors are essential for blood to clot properly, and their absence or deficiency can lead to prolonged bleeding, both internally and externally,” Dr Kumar said.Below are some key factors pointed by Dr Kumar, that might suggest that your child could be at a risk for haemophilia.   Family History One of the most primary and significant risk factors for haemophilia is having a family history of it. “If there's a known history of haemophilia in your family, especially on the mother’s side (since mothers carry the X chromosome), there's a possibility that you could be a carrier or that your child could inherit the disorder,” Dr Kumar said.   Prolonged Bleeding According to Dr Kumar, if your child experiences frequent or prolonged bleeding episodes after minor injuries, surgeries, or dental procedures, this could be a sign of haemophilia.  Bruising Easily Haemophiliac individuals tend to bruise easily and often. If your child frequently develops unexplained bruises, this could be a red flag for a bleeding disorder. Also read: World Haemophilia Day: Experiencing Swelling Or Pain In Joints? It May Be Due To This Blood Disease  Unexplained Nosebleeds or Gum Bleeding Recurrent bleeding from nose or from the gums without a clear cause could also indicate a problem with blood clotting  Postpartum Haemorrhage “If the mother experienced significant bleeding after childbirth, it could be an indicator of a bleeding disorder that could be passed on to her child,” Dr Kumar said.   Joint Pain or Swelling Internal bleeding into joints or muscles is a common symptom of haemophilia. If your child experiences joint pain, swelling, or tightness, especially after minor injuries, it could be a sign of internal bleeding.  In order to determine if your child has haemophilia, it is important to go through some tests. If you observe the above symptoms in your child, or if you have a family history of haemophilia or suspect that your child might be at risk you can consult your healthcare professional. Your doctor can perform specific blood tests to check for clotting factors. These tests can help diagnose haemophilia or other bleeding disorders.  Conclusion Concluding, Dr Kumar said, “If you suspect that your child might be at risk for haemophilia based on these factors, it's essential to consult with a healthcare professional promptly. Early diagnosis and proper management can significantly improve outcomes and quality of life for the child.”One of the most primary and significant risk factors for haemophilia is having a family history of it. “If there's a known history of haemophilia in your family, especially on the mother’s side (since mothers carry the X chromosome), there's a possibility that you could be a carrier or that your child could inherit the disorder,” Dr Kumar said.Prolonged Bleeding According to Dr Kumar, if your child experiences frequent or prolonged bleeding episodes after minor injuries, surgeries, or dental procedures, this could be a sign of haemophilia.  Bruising Easily Haemophiliac individuals tend to bruise easily and often. If your child frequently develops unexplained bruises, this could be a red flag for a bleeding disorder. Also read: World Haemophilia Day: Experiencing Swelling Or Pain In Joints? It May Be Due To This Blood Disease  Unexplained Nosebleeds or Gum Bleeding Recurrent bleeding from nose or from the gums without a clear cause could also indicate a problem with blood clotting  Postpartum Haemorrhage “If the mother experienced significant bleeding after childbirth, it could be an indicator of a bleeding disorder that could be passed on to her child,” Dr Kumar said.   Joint Pain or Swelling Internal bleeding into joints or muscles is a common symptom of haemophilia. If your child experiences joint pain, swelling, or tightness, especially after minor injuries, it could be a sign of internal bleeding.  In order to determine if your child has haemophilia, it is important to go through some tests. If you observe the above symptoms in your child, or if you have a family history of haemophilia or suspect that your child might be at risk you can consult your healthcare professional. Your doctor can perform specific blood tests to check for clotting factors. These tests can help diagnose haemophilia or other bleeding disorders.  Conclusion Concluding, Dr Kumar said, “If you suspect that your child might be at risk for haemophilia based on these factors, it's essential to consult with a healthcare professional promptly. Early diagnosis and proper management can significantly improve outcomes and quality of life for the child.”According to Dr Kumar, if your child experiences frequent or prolonged bleeding episodes after minor injuries, surgeries, or dental procedures, this could be a sign of haemophilia.  Bruising Easily Haemophiliac individuals tend to bruise easily and often. If your child frequently develops unexplained bruises, this could be a red flag for a bleeding disorder. Also read: World Haemophilia Day: Experiencing Swelling Or Pain In Joints? It May Be Due To This Blood Disease  Unexplained Nosebleeds or Gum Bleeding Recurrent bleeding from nose or from the gums without a clear cause could also indicate a problem with blood clotting  Postpartum Haemorrhage “If the mother experienced significant bleeding after childbirth, it could be an indicator of a bleeding disorder that could be passed on to her child,” Dr Kumar said.   Joint Pain or Swelling Internal bleeding into joints or muscles is a common symptom of haemophilia. If your child experiences joint pain, swelling, or tightness, especially after minor injuries, it could be a sign of internal bleeding.  In order to determine if your child has haemophilia, it is important to go through some tests. If you observe the above symptoms in your child, or if you have a family history of haemophilia or suspect that your child might be at risk you can consult your healthcare professional. Your doctor can perform specific blood tests to check for clotting factors. These tests can help diagnose haemophilia or other bleeding disorders.  Conclusion Concluding, Dr Kumar said, “If you suspect that your child might be at risk for haemophilia based on these factors, it's essential to consult with a healthcare professional promptly. Early diagnosis and proper management can significantly improve outcomes and quality of life for the child.”Haemophiliac individuals tend to bruise easily and often. If your child frequently develops unexplained bruises, this could be a red flag for a bleeding disorder.Also read: World Haemophilia Day: Experiencing Swelling Or Pain In Joints? It May Be Due To This Blood Disease  Unexplained Nosebleeds or Gum Bleeding Recurrent bleeding from nose or from the gums without a clear cause could also indicate a problem with blood clotting  Postpartum Haemorrhage “If the mother experienced significant bleeding after childbirth, it could be an indicator of a bleeding disorder that could be passed on to her child,” Dr Kumar said.   Joint Pain or Swelling Internal bleeding into joints or muscles is a common symptom of haemophilia. If your child experiences joint pain, swelling, or tightness, especially after minor injuries, it could be a sign of internal bleeding.  In order to determine if your child has haemophilia, it is important to go through some tests. If you observe the above symptoms in your child, or if you have a family history of haemophilia or suspect that your child might be at risk you can consult your healthcare professional. Your doctor can perform specific blood tests to check for clotting factors. These tests can help diagnose haemophilia or other bleeding disorders.  Conclusion Concluding, Dr Kumar said, “If you suspect that your child might be at risk for haemophilia based on these factors, it's essential to consult with a healthcare professional promptly. Early diagnosis and proper management can significantly improve outcomes and quality of life for the child.”Recurrent bleeding from nose or from the gums without a clear cause could also indicate a problem with blood clotting  Postpartum Haemorrhage “If the mother experienced significant bleeding after childbirth, it could be an indicator of a bleeding disorder that could be passed on to her child,” Dr Kumar said.   Joint Pain or Swelling Internal bleeding into joints or muscles is a common symptom of haemophilia. If your child experiences joint pain, swelling, or tightness, especially after minor injuries, it could be a sign of internal bleeding.  In order to determine if your child has haemophilia, it is important to go through some tests. If you observe the above symptoms in your child, or if you have a family history of haemophilia or suspect that your child might be at risk you can consult your healthcare professional. Your doctor can perform specific blood tests to check for clotting factors. These tests can help diagnose haemophilia or other bleeding disorders.  Conclusion Concluding, Dr Kumar said, “If you suspect that your child might be at risk for haemophilia based on these factors, it's essential to consult with a healthcare professional promptly. Early diagnosis and proper management can significantly improve outcomes and quality of life for the child.”“If the mother experienced significant bleeding after childbirth, it could be an indicator of a bleeding disorder that could be passed on to her child,” Dr Kumar said.   Joint Pain or Swelling Internal bleeding into joints or muscles is a common symptom of haemophilia. If your child experiences joint pain, swelling, or tightness, especially after minor injuries, it could be a sign of internal bleeding.  In order to determine if your child has haemophilia, it is important to go through some tests. If you observe the above symptoms in your child, or if you have a family history of haemophilia or suspect that your child might be at risk you can consult your healthcare professional. Your doctor can perform specific blood tests to check for clotting factors. These tests can help diagnose haemophilia or other bleeding disorders.  Conclusion Concluding, Dr Kumar said, “If you suspect that your child might be at risk for haemophilia based on these factors, it's essential to consult with a healthcare professional promptly. Early diagnosis and proper management can significantly improve outcomes and quality of life for the child.”Internal bleeding into joints or muscles is a common symptom of haemophilia. If your child experiences joint pain, swelling, or tightness, especially after minor injuries, it could be a sign of internal bleeding.In order to determine if your child has haemophilia, it is important to go through some tests. If you observe the above symptoms in your child, or if you have a family history of haemophilia or suspect that your child might be at risk you can consult your healthcare professional. Your doctor can perform specific blood tests to check for clotting factors. These tests can help diagnose haemophilia or other bleeding disorders.  Conclusion Concluding, Dr Kumar said, “If you suspect that your child might be at risk for haemophilia based on these factors, it's essential to consult with a healthcare professional promptly. Early diagnosis and proper management can significantly improve outcomes and quality of life for the child.”Concluding, Dr Kumar said, “If you suspect that your child might be at risk for haemophilia based on these factors, it's essential to consult with a healthcare professional promptly. Early diagnosis and proper management can significantly improve outcomes and quality of life for the child.”