Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) brings with it a host of challenges like hormonal disbalance, menstrual irregularities, weight gain, acne problems, and sleep issues. One disorder commonly seen in people with PCOS is Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA).According to a study led by researchers from the University of Chicago, as per a recent meta analysis of 12 clinical studies, adult women with PCOS have a 9.7 times higher chance of developing OSA. Talking to the Onlymyhealth team, Dr Sibasish Dey, Head of Medical Affairs, South Asia, ResMed cautioned that if someone with PCOS has developed sleep apnea, they should not ignore it as it can lead to severe consequences.PCOS is characterised by a number of disorder that can pave the way for OSA. Dr Dey listed:   Excess androgens and low progesterone levels are commonly found in PCOS individuals. These hormonal fluctuations can cause OSA. Obesity is another consequence of PCOS, and is also a major risk factor for individuals to develop sleep apnea. Women with PCOS frequently have insulin resistance, which in the long run may lead to type 2 diabetes mellitus. Type 2 diabetes is also a risk factor for OSA.     What Happens If You Ignore Obstructive Sleep Apnea? OSA couples with PCOS poses a serious risk of cardiovascular diseases, poor liver function, metabolic disorders, and irregular menstrual cycles. Dr Dey listed some of the serious consequences of unmanaged OSA in women with PCOS:  Heart Disease Dr Dey said, "OSA causes sleep fragmentation which leads to oxidative stress, and systemic inflammation leading to cardio-metabolic disorders in the long run." He added, "Moreover, the intermittent hypoxia associated with sleep apnea may elevate blood pressure, contributing to hypertension and cardiovascular disease." An American study assessing cardiovascular risk in people with OSA found that approximately 35% of patients with heart failure have OSA, and OSA is independently associated with a 2.38 odds of having heart failure.  Also Read: How To Treat Sleep Apnea Caused By PCOS? Expert Answers  Liver Disease "It is also common in people with OSA to develop NAFLD (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease)," said Dr Dey. A study published in the World Journal of Gastroenterology found that OSA increases the risk of NAFLD even in the absence of coexisting comorbidities such as obesity or metabolic syndrome. In return, NAFLD further exacerbates OSA.   Type 2 Diabetes "Sleep apnea also disrupts metabolic processes, worsening insulin resistance and is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus," shared Dr Dey. A study titled 'Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Diabetes' found evidence that suggests that the relationship between OSA and type 2 diabetes is independent of mutual risk factors like obesity and ageing, which presents that both conditions have a direct relation.  Irregular Menstrual Cycle and Infertility Lastly, Dr Dey mentioned, "Untreated sleep apnea can exacerbate PCOS symptoms such as irregular menstrual cycles and infertility." Also Read: Do You Know That PCOS Can Cause Sleep Disorders? Expert Shares How It Leads To Obstructive Sleep Apnea  Dr Dey concluded that these are the reasons why it is imperative that someone diagnosed with PCOS should never ignore symptoms of OSA. He recommended that early diagnosis and management of both conditions is crucial to mitigate these adverse health outcomes.OSA couples with PCOS poses a serious risk of cardiovascular diseases, poor liver function, metabolic disorders, and irregular menstrual cycles. Dr Dey listed some of the serious consequences of unmanaged OSA in women with PCOS:  Heart Disease Dr Dey said, "OSA causes sleep fragmentation which leads to oxidative stress, and systemic inflammation leading to cardio-metabolic disorders in the long run." He added, "Moreover, the intermittent hypoxia associated with sleep apnea may elevate blood pressure, contributing to hypertension and cardiovascular disease." An American study assessing cardiovascular risk in people with OSA found that approximately 35% of patients with heart failure have OSA, and OSA is independently associated with a 2.38 odds of having heart failure.  Also Read: How To Treat Sleep Apnea Caused By PCOS? Expert Answers  Liver Disease "It is also common in people with OSA to develop NAFLD (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease)," said Dr Dey. A study published in the World Journal of Gastroenterology found that OSA increases the risk of NAFLD even in the absence of coexisting comorbidities such as obesity or metabolic syndrome. In return, NAFLD further exacerbates OSA.   Type 2 Diabetes "Sleep apnea also disrupts metabolic processes, worsening insulin resistance and is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus," shared Dr Dey. A study titled 'Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Diabetes' found evidence that suggests that the relationship between OSA and type 2 diabetes is independent of mutual risk factors like obesity and ageing, which presents that both conditions have a direct relation.  Irregular Menstrual Cycle and Infertility Lastly, Dr Dey mentioned, "Untreated sleep apnea can exacerbate PCOS symptoms such as irregular menstrual cycles and infertility." Also Read: Do You Know That PCOS Can Cause Sleep Disorders? Expert Shares How It Leads To Obstructive Sleep Apnea  Dr Dey concluded that these are the reasons why it is imperative that someone diagnosed with PCOS should never ignore symptoms of OSA. He recommended that early diagnosis and management of both conditions is crucial to mitigate these adverse health outcomes.Dr Dey said, "OSA causes sleep fragmentation which leads to oxidative stress, and systemic inflammation leading to cardio-metabolic disorders in the long run." He added, "Moreover, the intermittent hypoxia associated with sleep apnea may elevate blood pressure, contributing to hypertension and cardiovascular disease."An American study assessing cardiovascular risk in people with OSA found that approximately 35% of patients with heart failure have OSA, and OSA is independently associated with a 2.38 odds of having heart failure.Also Read: How To Treat Sleep Apnea Caused By PCOS? Expert AnswersLiver Disease "It is also common in people with OSA to develop NAFLD (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease)," said Dr Dey. A study published in the World Journal of Gastroenterology found that OSA increases the risk of NAFLD even in the absence of coexisting comorbidities such as obesity or metabolic syndrome. In return, NAFLD further exacerbates OSA.   Type 2 Diabetes "Sleep apnea also disrupts metabolic processes, worsening insulin resistance and is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus," shared Dr Dey. A study titled 'Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Diabetes' found evidence that suggests that the relationship between OSA and type 2 diabetes is independent of mutual risk factors like obesity and ageing, which presents that both conditions have a direct relation.  Irregular Menstrual Cycle and Infertility Lastly, Dr Dey mentioned, "Untreated sleep apnea can exacerbate PCOS symptoms such as irregular menstrual cycles and infertility." Also Read: Do You Know That PCOS Can Cause Sleep Disorders? Expert Shares How It Leads To Obstructive Sleep Apnea  Dr Dey concluded that these are the reasons why it is imperative that someone diagnosed with PCOS should never ignore symptoms of OSA. He recommended that early diagnosis and management of both conditions is crucial to mitigate these adverse health outcomes."It is also common in people with OSA to develop NAFLD (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease)," said Dr Dey. A study published in the World Journal of Gastroenterology found that OSA increases the risk of NAFLD even in the absence of coexisting comorbidities such as obesity or metabolic syndrome. In return, NAFLD further exacerbates OSA.   Type 2 Diabetes "Sleep apnea also disrupts metabolic processes, worsening insulin resistance and is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus," shared Dr Dey. A study titled 'Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Diabetes' found evidence that suggests that the relationship between OSA and type 2 diabetes is independent of mutual risk factors like obesity and ageing, which presents that both conditions have a direct relation.  Irregular Menstrual Cycle and Infertility Lastly, Dr Dey mentioned, "Untreated sleep apnea can exacerbate PCOS symptoms such as irregular menstrual cycles and infertility." Also Read: Do You Know That PCOS Can Cause Sleep Disorders? Expert Shares How It Leads To Obstructive Sleep Apnea  Dr Dey concluded that these are the reasons why it is imperative that someone diagnosed with PCOS should never ignore symptoms of OSA. He recommended that early diagnosis and management of both conditions is crucial to mitigate these adverse health outcomes."Sleep apnea also disrupts metabolic processes, worsening insulin resistance and is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus," shared Dr Dey. A study titled 'Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Diabetes' found evidence that suggests that the relationship between OSA and type 2 diabetes is independent of mutual risk factors like obesity and ageing, which presents that both conditions have a direct relation.  Irregular Menstrual Cycle and Infertility Lastly, Dr Dey mentioned, "Untreated sleep apnea can exacerbate PCOS symptoms such as irregular menstrual cycles and infertility." Also Read: Do You Know That PCOS Can Cause Sleep Disorders? Expert Shares How It Leads To Obstructive Sleep Apnea  Dr Dey concluded that these are the reasons why it is imperative that someone diagnosed with PCOS should never ignore symptoms of OSA. He recommended that early diagnosis and management of both conditions is crucial to mitigate these adverse health outcomes.Lastly, Dr Dey mentioned, "Untreated sleep apnea can exacerbate PCOS symptoms such as irregular menstrual cycles and infertility."Also Read: Do You Know That PCOS Can Cause Sleep Disorders? Expert Shares How It Leads To Obstructive Sleep ApneaDr Dey concluded that these are the reasons why it is imperative that someone diagnosed with PCOS should never ignore symptoms of OSA. He recommended that early diagnosis and management of both conditions is crucial to mitigate these adverse health outcomes.