A report has claimed that Nestle adds nearly 3 grams of sugar in every serving of cerelac, the baby food. The Union Consumer Affairs Ministry directed the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to look into it and take appropriate action.Public Eye and International Baby Food Action Network (IBFAN) conducted an investigation and found out that Nestle adds sugar in baby food products and presents it as healthy and key to supporting children’s development. But how does sugar affect the health of babies?To understand this, OnlyMyHealth interacted with Dr Tanushri Mukherjee, Consultant – Paediatrician and Neonatologist, Cloudnine Group of Hospitals, Malad, Mumbai.Talking about the impact, Dr Mukherjee said, “The impact of sugar on babies is significant and can have several adverse effects on their health and development. This is why it is generally not recommended to feed sugary foods to babies, especially in excess or as a primary source of nutrition.” Here’s why you should not give sugary foods to your babies.Firstly, introducing sugary foods to babies can lead to a preference for sweet tastes later in life. If they grow fond of sugary foods, it can contribute to a higher risk of developing  health issues such as obesity, diabetes, and dental problems in the future, Dr Mukherjee said.Sugar provides ‘empty calories’ which means it lacks essential nutrients like minerals, vitamins, and protein which are crucial for baby’s growth and development. “And as babies may miss out on important nutrients that their growing bodies need, this can create a “nutrient gap,” potentially leading to nutrient deficiencies and other health complications,” Dr Mukhejee said.Sugary foods can impact on the dental health of the babies. Sugar promotes the growth of bacteria in the mouth that can cause tooth decay and cavities, even in very young children. “Baby teeth are susceptible to decay, and good dental hygiene practices are essential to prevent long-term dental issues,” she said.Babies who consume a lot of sugary foods might become less interested in healthier, more nutritious foods like fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. This can create challenges in establishing a balanced diet and may lead to poor eating habits later in life.Also read: Bournvita To Be Removed From ‘Health drinks’ Category; Foods and Drinks That Are Surprisingly High in Sugar Natural Substitutes Of Baby Food Products As per Dr Mukherjee, establishing healthy feeding practices early in life helps babies maintain a healthy weight and avoid chronic diseases. Given these considerations, it’s important to prioritise natural and nutritious foods when feeding babies. Below are some natural substitutes of baby food products that Dr Mukherjee listed down.   1. Fruits: Pureed fruits like bananas, apples, pears, and berries can add natural sweetness to baby food. These fruits also provide essential vitamins, minerals, and fibre.  2. Vegetables: Sweet vegetables such as sweet potatoes and carrots can be cooked and mashed to create naturally sweet and nutritious baby food options.  3. Breast Milk: Breast milk should remain the primary source of nutrition for babies under one year old. However, formulas can be given under the recommendation of a paediatrician. These provide the ideal balance of nutrients for healthy growth and development without added sugars.  4. Unsweetened Yoghurt: Plain, unsweetened yoghurt can be introduced to babies (after consulting with a paediatrician) as it contains beneficial probiotics and nutrients without added sugars. 5. Whole Grains: Foods like oatmeal and brown rice can be prepared and mixed with fruits or vegetables to create a naturally sweet and wholesome meal for babies.  Also read: Non-sugar Sweeteners Actually Bad For Health, Study Reveals Conclusion It is crucial to limit sugar intake in babies for promoting healthy growth and preventing health issues in future. “By focusing on natural, nutrient-dense foods and avoiding added sugars, caregivers can provide the best start for their baby’s lifelong health and well-being. Always consult with a paediatrician or healthcare provider for personalised advice on feeding your baby,” Dr Mukherjee said. She also advised to read food labels and check for hidden sweeteners and added sugar.  (Disclaimer: This article is only for informational purposes. We advise you to consult your doctor if your baby is having any health issues)As per Dr Mukherjee, establishing healthy feeding practices early in life helps babies maintain a healthy weight and avoid chronic diseases. Given these considerations, it’s important to prioritise natural and nutritious foods when feeding babies. Below are some natural substitutes of baby food products that Dr Mukherjee listed down.1. Fruits: Pureed fruits like bananas, apples, pears, and berries can add natural sweetness to baby food. These fruits also provide essential vitamins, minerals, and fibre.2. Vegetables: Sweet vegetables such as sweet potatoes and carrots can be cooked and mashed to create naturally sweet and nutritious baby food options.3. Breast Milk: Breast milk should remain the primary source of nutrition for babies under one year old. However, formulas can be given under the recommendation of a paediatrician. These provide the ideal balance of nutrients for healthy growth and development without added sugars.4. Unsweetened Yoghurt: Plain, unsweetened yoghurt can be introduced to babies (after consulting with a paediatrician) as it contains beneficial probiotics and nutrients without added sugars.5. Whole Grains: Foods like oatmeal and brown rice can be prepared and mixed with fruits or vegetables to create a naturally sweet and wholesome meal for babies.Also read: Non-sugar Sweeteners Actually Bad For Health, Study Reveals Conclusion It is crucial to limit sugar intake in babies for promoting healthy growth and preventing health issues in future. “By focusing on natural, nutrient-dense foods and avoiding added sugars, caregivers can provide the best start for their baby’s lifelong health and well-being. Always consult with a paediatrician or healthcare provider for personalised advice on feeding your baby,” Dr Mukherjee said. She also advised to read food labels and check for hidden sweeteners and added sugar.  (Disclaimer: This article is only for informational purposes. We advise you to consult your doctor if your baby is having any health issues)It is crucial to limit sugar intake in babies for promoting healthy growth and preventing health issues in future. “By focusing on natural, nutrient-dense foods and avoiding added sugars, caregivers can provide the best start for their baby’s lifelong health and well-being. Always consult with a paediatrician or healthcare provider for personalised advice on feeding your baby,” Dr Mukherjee said. She also advised to read food labels and check for hidden sweeteners and added sugar.(Disclaimer: This article is only for informational purposes. We advise you to consult your doctor if your baby is having any health issues)